[[modcluster-node-conf]]
= ModCluster node conf

NOTE: {editurl}node_conf.adoc[{editnote}]

mod_cluster first spec documentation is mod_jk oriented in the node description
mod-cluster document.

mod_cluster should be based on mod_proxy and logic to guess the cluster
configuration is not needed. Let's going through the worker ajp13 parameter and
see what to do.

The worker parameters are listed on
http://tomcat.apache.org/connectors-doc/reference/workers.html only the
ajp13-type worker directives make sense for us.

In bold The parameters will be added to mod_jk existing worker parameters.

== General node definition:

* host that is host of BalancerMember http://host:port

* port that is port pf BalancerMember http://host:port

* type that is the scheme used ajp, http or https (type already exists in
mod_jk but that is not the scheme and only ajp scheme was supported).

* route that is the JvmRoute. In mod_jk that is the name of the node.

* socket_timeout  that could be ProxyTimeout or timeout of proxy backend
parameters.

* socket_keepalive  that is keepalive of proxy backend parameters.

==  pool/opened connection directives.

The mod_proxy directives are more accurate for mod_cluster than the mod_jk
ones:

* connection_pool_size that is max of proxy backend parameters.

* connection_pool_minsize that is min of proxy backend parameters.

* connection_pool_timeout that is ttl of proxy backend parameters

We will use:

* `min` Minumum number of connections that will always be kept open to the
backend server.

* `max` We probably shouldn't document it because it often causes problems
at customer.

* `smax` Soft Maximum number of connections will be created on demand. Any
connections above smax are subject to a time to `ttl`.

* `acquire` Maximum time to wait for a free connection in the connection pool.
If there are no free connections in the pool the httpd will reject the
connection.

* `ttl` Time To Live for the inactive connections above the smax connections in
seconds. httpd will close all connections that have not been used inside that
time period.

== timeout directives

* connect_timeout that is timeout of proxy backend parameters (Defaut to
ProxyTimeout and then to server TimeOut directive).

* prepost_timeout that is ping of proxy backend parameter.

* reply_timeout like connect_timeout.

== error handling directives

* retries NOT USED.

* recovery_options NOT USED.

* fail_on_status NOT USED.

* recovery_options NOT USED.

* fail_on_status NOT USED.

Existing mod_proxy code will be changed to allow one retry if ping/pong it will
use the next node if ping/pong still fails.
503 be returned if the request can't be forwarded to any nodes.

== packet size definition

max_packet_size that is iobuffersize of proxy backend parameter.

== other directives:

* max_reply_timeouts NOT USED.

* secret NOT USED that doesn't increase the security of the connection only SSL
would be a safe option.

== routing directives:

* domain The logic has to be added in mod_cluster code (See CONFIG in <<mcmp,ModCluster Management Protocol>>)

* distance NOT USED. The logic in the cluster to calculate load factor the
should allow that.

* redirect that will be the redirect proxy backend parameters (failover node).
Even if the logic in the cluster could trigger it via the load factor in a
domain that is useful feature.

* sticky_session  whether sticky sessions should be used

* sticky_session_force whether failover should be disallowed once a session is
established

* sticky_id That is the stickysession mod_proxy that allow to change the name
of parameter or the cookie containing the sessionid information.

