= mod_cluster version 1.3.1.Final released!

We are happy to announce that mod_cluster version 1.3.1.Final has been
released!

You can obtain the release from:

* bundled in WildFly 9.0.0.Final (TBA soon)

* https://repository.jboss.org/nexus/#nexus-search;gav\~org.jboss.mod_cluster\~\~1.3.1.Final\~\~[
JBoss Nexus] using Maven

* mod_cluster community website
http://mod-cluster.jboss.org/mod_cluster/downloads/1-3-1-Final-bin[mod_cluster
1.3.1.Final bin Downloads - JBoss Community]

* https://registry.hub.docker.com/u/karm/mod_cluster-master-dockerhub/[Docker
image on DockerHub] with Apache HTTP Server with mod_cluster modules

* source code on GitHub at
https://github.com/modcluster/mod_cluster/tree/1.3.1.Final[modcluster/mod_cluster
at 1.3.1.Final Â· GitHub]

* Change log for the 1.3.1.Alpha/Beta/Final releases:

== Release Notes - mod_cluster - Version 1.3.1.Final

=== Bug

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-388[MODCLUSTER-388]] - Fix for
MODCLUSTER-372 is broken

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-451[MODCLUSTER-451]] - UUID for
auto-generated jvmRoute does not work with WildFly

=== Task

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-441[MODCLUSTER-441]] - Upgrade
Tomcat 8 support to 8.0.16 due to OPTIONS * broken (BZ#57187)

== Release Notes - mod_cluster - Version 1.3.1.Beta1

=== Bug

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-389[MODCLUSTER-389]] - standby
worker doesn't work.

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-427[MODCLUSTER-427]] -
mod_cluster can break stickiness for the first request on new child processes

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-435[MODCLUSTER-435]] - If
"Balancer name includes" uppercase letter in name then mod_cluster will not
maintain sticky sessions

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-443[MODCLUSTER-443]] -
mod_cluster doesn't recognize ; as a proper context delimiter causing 404s on
requests with URL jsessionids

=== Enhancement

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-390[MODCLUSTER-390]] - add
failonstatus to mod_cluster

=== Feature Request

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-354[MODCLUSTER-354]] - Add
support for Tomcat 8

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-431[MODCLUSTER-431]] -
MulticastSocketFactoryImplTestCase.testMulticastSocketAllowCrossTalk doesn't
work since JDK 1.8

== Release Notes - mod_cluster - Version 1.3.1.Alpha2

=== Feature Request

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-414[MODCLUSTER-414]] - Fix
compilation warnings in the native part


* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-423[MODCLUSTER-423]] - Proxy
configuration to allow a desired address/interface to be specified for the AS
side of the proxy connection

== Release Notes - mod_cluster - Version 1.3.1.Alpha1

=== Bug

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-344[MODCLUSTER-344]] - No pings
when using HTTP connector in default configuration

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-392[MODCLUSTER-392]] -
mod_proxy_cluster.c doesn't compile with httpd 2.2.22

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-398[MODCLUSTER-398]] -
mod_cluster deadlock in a jboss/windows environment

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-403[MODCLUSTER-403]] - UseAlias
should use flag, interprets any On/Off/on/off as 0

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-404[MODCLUSTER-404]] -
ModClusterService stop commands are always draining sessions

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-407[MODCLUSTER-407]] -
worker-timeout can cause httpd thread stalls

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-408[MODCLUSTER-408]] - Requests
are not properly drained during undeploy

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-418[MODCLUSTER-418]] - Upgrade
maven repositories to jboss developer from the deprecated repositories
 

=== Component Upgrade

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-426[MODCLUSTER-426]] - Upgrade jboss-parent to version 16
 
=== Enhancement

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-209[MODCLUSTER-209]] -
mod_cluster_manager need better presentation
 
=== Feature Request

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-405[MODCLUSTER-405]] - Make the
testsuite a little more portable

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-409[MODCLUSTER-409]] - add
VERSION method to MCMP

* [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MODCLUSTER-413[MODCLUSTER-413]] - Log
superfluous stack traces onto DEBUG instead of ERROR level
 

Enjoy!

